# Upgrading to Web UI 0.10

This is a **major** release that brings many things to the table.

This version of the Karafka Web UI requires Karafka `>= 2.4.7`. You can either upgrade both or upgrade Karafka first and then the Web UI. Karafka `2.4.7` is also compatible with Web UI `0.9.1`; thus, you can upgrade one at a time.

## Configuration

Visibility Filters have been reorganized into messages policies.

Please read the [Policies API](https://karafka.io/docs/Pro-Web-UI-Policies/) documentation and convert your visibility filters to policies.

Your existing message-related visibility filter policies should now be assigned to a new configuration:

```ruby
Karafka::Web.setup do |config|
  config.ui.policies.messages = MyCustomRequestsPolicy.new
end
```

## Deployment

Because of the reporting schema update, it is recommended to:

0. Make sure you have upgraded to `0.9.1` before and that it was fully deployed.
1. Test the upgrade on a staging or dev environment.
3. The Web UI interface may throw 500 errors during the upgrade because of schema incompatibility (until Puma is deployed and all consumers redeployed). This will have no long-term effects and can be ignored.
4. `Karafka::Web::Errors::Processing::IncompatibleSchemaError` **is expected**. It is part of the Karafka Web UI zero-downtime deployment strategy. This error allows the Web UI materialization consumer to back off and wait for it to be replaced with a new one.
5. Perform a rolling deployment (or a regular one) and replace all consumer processes.
6. Update the Web UI Puma.
7. **No** CLI command execution is required.
8. Enjoy.
